And we have a red light to go.
NOTE CONF
Hello.
It's Friday.
NOTE CONF
Of week six.
Do you know why this is a particularly special Friday?
NOTE CONF
We are now over halfway through your first term.
Yay!
NOTE CONF
It's nearly time to.
You just got to repeat what you've done once, and
NOTE CONF
then you're done.
Um, for your first term.
NOTE CONF
So, yes, we are halfway.
Hooray!
NOTE CONF
Um, and we are continuing on from yesterday, where we
ended by looking at the equation of a straight line.
NOTE CONF
And we found that there were lots of ways to
write a straight line.
NOTE CONF
I got bored after I found about ten, but you
can keep going.
NOTE CONF
There are loads endless ways of writing a straight line.
Uh, pick your favourite.
NOTE CONF
Probably one from that side and one from that side.
It's useful to have a vector equation of a straight
NOTE CONF
line, But, uh, yeah, we're used to seeing these.
These are all things we've we've seen before.
NOTE CONF
We're going to discuss the cross product a bit later
today, but determinants.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
So lots of ways to write a straight line.
NOTE CONF
And that's where we ended yesterday.
So on that note we are going to do our
NOTE CONF
first question which is all about straight lines.
So first question if we have the line L passing
NOTE CONF
through the origin.
So we are back to having numbers.
NOTE CONF
Um we're passing through the origin and we have vector
equation x equals t times some d plus a.
NOTE CONF
Which of the following is true a has to equal
zero, a doesn't equal zero.
NOTE CONF
A is a scalar multiple of d d equal zero
d doesn't equal zero.
NOTE CONF
Have a chat with your friend.
Have a.
NOTE CONF
Think about this.
What are we thinking?
NOTE CONF
This.
Is.
NOTE CONF
And.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Over half people have voted, so I'm going to give
you 20s more.
NOTE CONF
Whoops.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Let's pretend that didn't happen.
Okay, let's see what we're voting.
NOTE CONF
So let's get to 100.
Let's have two more people vote.
NOTE CONF
It'd be nice to get 100.
Nice round number.
NOTE CONF
No.
No one asks for, like, a vote.
NOTE CONF
Oh, there we go.
Well done.
NOTE CONF
The 100th voter.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so.
Lots of people saying a should be zero.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Or D should not be zero.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
Some people saying A is a scalar multiple of D,
NOTE CONF
some saying none of the above.
Oh keep.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's see what some of the comments are.
NOTE CONF
What about a should equals error y intercept y intercept.
It is Friday I know it's a great feeling.
NOTE CONF
Um yeah I see where you're coming from.
And actually if we think about the um, parametric form
NOTE CONF
of of a line.
So we've got something that looks like this.
NOTE CONF
We're essentially saying we've got a you know, this is
a point on the line because if I stick in
NOTE CONF
T equals zero, this is a point on my line.
So I know zero is on my line.
NOTE CONF
So yeah, that makes sense.
Um, we're also saying d should an equal zero.
NOTE CONF
Does anyone want to say any comments about D.
Should an equal zero.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Zero zero equals.
NOTE CONF
To the origin.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Exactly.
If d was an equal to zero we'd.
NOTE CONF
If that's equal to zero we'd just have x equals
p which is definitely not a line.
NOTE CONF
That's just a point x is just a pointer.
So we can't this equation is essentially saying here's a
NOTE CONF
point to get onto your line.
Here's a direction of your line that you can move
NOTE CONF
across T steps.
But if you can't move along your line T steps,
NOTE CONF
then you've not got an equation of your line.
So you better have that d not equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What about A is a scalar multiple of d?
NOTE CONF
Um, if A equals zero then the common multiple of
zero.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
If A is zero then yes, they are technically scalar
multiples of each other.
NOTE CONF
Um a minus t equals zero goes to the origin.
Yes you zero and a is equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
Then this statement is true.
So B is not equal to zero is not always
NOTE CONF
true.
So we say that again.
NOTE CONF
B and a are zero.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And x equal to zero goes to the origin.
For the equal to zero is true.
NOTE CONF
Uh okay.
But if both D and in this case I seem
NOTE CONF
to have changed my notation r zero, then you've essentially
got the equation x equals zero.
NOTE CONF
That's not a line.
That's a point.
NOTE CONF
We still want it to be the equation of a
line.
NOTE CONF
So x is.
Equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
That means it's a line because it doesn't matter what
he's just going to be.
NOTE CONF
Uh so okay so safety equals zero and p equals
zero.
NOTE CONF
Then this whole equation is just x equals zero.
That's not the equation of a line because that's just
NOTE CONF
the equation of a point.
We're just what is that vector.
NOTE CONF
It's got zero sides and no direction.
It's two dimensional.
NOTE CONF
And d can be anything like except an axis.
So so x is the kind of unknown bit.
NOTE CONF
So okay so let's think of it.
Let's deconstruct this equation of the line a bit.
NOTE CONF
This is essentially I've got my line and I've got
somewhere my origin over here in this particular case, my
NOTE CONF
origins on my line.
But more generally we've got a line in an origin.
NOTE CONF
Equations of this form have some vector d that go
along the equation of the line.
NOTE CONF
So giving us a direction to go along that line.
And then this point p is just some point on
NOTE CONF
our line.
So this is a kind of directional vector.
NOTE CONF
And p we're actually taking to be a positional vector.
So from the origin it's giving us a point to
NOTE CONF
go to on our line.
So then what this is saying is the point x.
NOTE CONF
The general point x on my line is I go
up p, I go from the origin to P, then
NOTE CONF
I go along d by some scalar multiple of it.
So I take ds t steps along d and then
NOTE CONF
I get to the point x.
Um, and that's the kind of addition.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
I think the last.
NOTE CONF
Confusion is because X represents a vector, not an.
X coordinate.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So that's this is the vector, you know, x1 all
NOTE CONF
the way up to x n for example.
Um, it is a general point on our line that
NOTE CONF
we're trying to find.
It's not a fixed point.
NOTE CONF
So so D and P are fixed vectors.
We have the vector x is just the vector of
NOTE CONF
the point on the line we're trying to find.
Does that make sense to people a bit.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So if D is zero then we can't.
NOTE CONF
We don't have a direction for a line.
We don't know which way our line's pointing.
NOTE CONF
So we probably almost certainly definitely don't want D to
be zero.
NOTE CONF
Any questions or are we happy with that.
We're good.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So what kind of conditions do we want on a
do we want?
NOTE CONF
So in our case, the origin is actually on the
line.
NOTE CONF
So we could take.
Does that mean a has to be zero.
NOTE CONF
No.
Any other opinions Y no.
NOTE CONF
Anyone?
You're right.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't have to be on the line.
Okay, so we know it could be zero.
NOTE CONF
We're not saying it's not zero, but actually all we're
saying is it's it's some it's some point on our
NOTE CONF
line.
It doesn't have to be the point zero just because
NOTE CONF
zero is on our line.
Does that mean that's the only point we can choose
NOTE CONF
when writing this equation?
We could choose any point P, we could choose.
NOTE CONF
You know, let's actually draw the line L through our
origin.
NOTE CONF
So we've got our vector D.
Along a line we could choose that point, but we
NOTE CONF
could also choose this point.
That's still going to be our starting point.
NOTE CONF
And we can walk along from from this point.
So it just it doesn't have to be zero, but
NOTE CONF
it does have to be a vector that to get
from the origin to I pass along d.
NOTE CONF
So it does have to be a scalar multiple of
d.
NOTE CONF
Are there any questions or does that make sense to
people?
NOTE CONF
Oh it's quiet Friday.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Are we a bit happy?
Very happy.
NOTE CONF
Not happy or kind of middling?
Not happy.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We're generally middling to good.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I will take middling to good.
NOTE CONF
We have some very enthusiastic people, some middling people, and
no one's saying no, I think so.
NOTE CONF
Um, it is worth having a think about this.
Um, and I think one of the example videos in
NOTE CONF
the reading quiz will be on this.
So worth coming back to.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that's the equation for line.
Um, let us move on to the equation of a
NOTE CONF
plane.
Um, we've seen the parametric form of a plane.
NOTE CONF
What's the parametric form for a plane.
So this is the parametric form for a line.
NOTE CONF
What's the parametric form for a plane?
There you go.
NOTE CONF
There's my unknown vector x.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
There we.
Go.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
Oops.
NOTE CONF
Let's write this.
Let's have one vector A, two vectors B and a
NOTE CONF
game.
We're going to have a pointer that takes us to
NOTE CONF
our plane, because our plane doesn't have to go through
the origin.
NOTE CONF
And even if it does, we can choose another point
to start with.
NOTE CONF
Essentially what we're saying here, and you'll have to excuse
my bad drawing, is here's my plane.
NOTE CONF
I want a point to get onto my plane from
the origin.
NOTE CONF
I'm starting at the origin.
Give me a point to go to.
NOTE CONF
And then I want two vectors, in this case A
and B, in order to be able to walk along
NOTE CONF
my plane so I can walk one way, I can
walk another, I can walk anywhere along my plane.
NOTE CONF
But I need just a point to start on my
plane.
NOTE CONF
This is the point where you plonk me down and
yeah, I've got somewhere to begin and then I can
NOTE CONF
walk anywhere I want to.
Okay, so it's the same principle as the line you
NOTE CONF
plonk me down somewhere and then I can walk along.
Except this time I can walk along in two directions.
NOTE CONF
So I get a plane.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this is the parametric form, uh, which we've
seen before.
NOTE CONF
Uh, we also have the normal form.
So if we think about this equation of the plane,
NOTE CONF
all of those points A, B and P, or lie
in the plane, they're all points in the plane, P
NOTE CONF
is a point on the plane, and A is a
vector that lies in the plane, and B is a
NOTE CONF
vector that lies in the plane.
Because if not, I wouldn't be staying in the plane
NOTE CONF
when I walked along.
So everything there is in the plane, and that's generally
NOTE CONF
very useful.
If you're looking at the plane, it's useful to see
NOTE CONF
what is in the plane, except sometimes it's not.
Sometimes it's useful to see what's not in the plane
NOTE CONF
rather than what it is.
Um, particularly in three dimensions, if I'm in three dimensions
NOTE CONF
and I've got to find a plane, how many dimensions
do I have?
NOTE CONF
The kind of aren't in my plane?
How many ways off can I jump off my plane?
NOTE CONF
One.
Yeah, exactly.
NOTE CONF
There is one unique line that is perpendicular to my
plane where I could one direction I can go in.
NOTE CONF
That's definitely not in my plane.
So in my walking on the stage example, that's up.
NOTE CONF
If I jump, I'm not in my plane.
I've gone up and my feet left the floor.
NOTE CONF
Um, and sometimes it's useful to know what that third
direction is.
NOTE CONF
What is the direction that's not in the plane.
And then you can kind of take the plane to
NOTE CONF
be everything that's kind of not in that third direction,
that's perpendicular to that direction, which in some cases is
NOTE CONF
a really useful way of looking at it.
So this is the normal form named because we call
NOTE CONF
this perpendicular.
Uh, what does anyone know what we call this?
NOTE CONF
Perpendicular.
Hopefully you all do the normal.
NOTE CONF
Yay!
So this is the normal vector.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we're going to take our general point x which
NOTE CONF
is some point in the plane that we want to
find.
NOTE CONF
Um, and we want actually to find a line in
the plane.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to take away a point in the
plane that we know is in the plane, and then
NOTE CONF
we want this to be perpendicular to our normal vector
n from yesterday.
NOTE CONF
Do we remember how to what operation did we have
that showed if two vectors of perpendicular dot products.
NOTE CONF
Yay.
Okay, so I can take the dot product for then.
NOTE CONF
And I want that to be zero.
Perfect.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So there's the normal form um of a plane.
NOTE CONF
So I have a vector normal to the plane.
And I have a point in the plane.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so let us try another question.
Thinking about planes.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so there's an equation of a plane, the normal
equation of a plane.
NOTE CONF
And I am going to have two points on my
plane, A and B, two points on my plane.
NOTE CONF
Is it true that n a has to equal n
b?
NOTE CONF
So I will give you a moment to think about
this.
NOTE CONF
Have a chat.
And.
NOTE CONF
Then we will have a chat about it all together.
Okay, I'm going to give it over halfway, so I'm
NOTE CONF
going to give you 20s left.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
10s more.
Well, we seem to have stalled slightly in the voting,
NOTE CONF
so, um, we seem to have a firm consensus that
this is true.
NOTE CONF
Yay!
Okay, so the vote about about 4/5 of us are
NOTE CONF
saying this is true.
Three quarters of us are saying this is true.
NOTE CONF
Why are we saying it's true?
Uh, they are both on the plane.
NOTE CONF
NP equals, uh, XP equals BPL.
Yeah, I can't speak.
NOTE CONF
It's Friday.
X n equals p n, so x a equals n
NOTE CONF
p b.
That's true.
NOTE CONF
By the distributive property.
Um good.
NOTE CONF
Can we have fun as a set of vectors Friday.
Vectors are fun.
NOTE CONF
You're obviously not buying into the vector fun.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Good.
I think that is all good.
NOTE CONF
Oh, okay.
I'm just going to adjust this one comment, actually, because
NOTE CONF
this is a good a good thing to bring up.
Actually the dot product is zero with the normal for
NOTE CONF
both of them.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's not actually true.
Um, so let's let's think about it in in and
NOTE CONF
let's try and draw another picture.
I'm sorry.
NOTE CONF
You're doomed to watch me do lots of bad pictures.
Um, so in this case, we have some vector, some
NOTE CONF
plane with a normal, and then we have two points
a, b.
NOTE CONF
We're saying those points are in the plane.
We're not saying the vectors are in the plane.
NOTE CONF
In fact, they're not.
These would be the vectors from the origin.
NOTE CONF
If if I just say these are points in the
plane and we're talking about them as vectors, we're talking
NOTE CONF
about them as position vectors.
So as the vector from the origin to that point.
NOTE CONF
Um, so yes, these both lie in the plane, and
any vector that lies in the plane dotted with n
NOTE CONF
would be zero, but a and b as vectors.
The vector a does not lie in the plane.
NOTE CONF
The vector A goes from the origin to A that
is not in the plane.
NOTE CONF
The vector from A to B that's in the plane
that's lying on the plane, but the vector A from
NOTE CONF
the origin to the point A is not in the
plane.
NOTE CONF
So actually these aren't perpendicular.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
The direction along the plane, not the point.
On the plane.
NOTE CONF
So again, it's.
Welcome to the fun world of vectors, where we use
NOTE CONF
the word vector to describe many, many different things.
Um, so the question said where A and B are
NOTE CONF
two points on the plane.
So when we're taking them as points on the plane,
NOTE CONF
we're taking them as position vectors.
So it's not like A and B, it's not like
NOTE CONF
a and B from the previous one.
Notation and maths is not consistent.
NOTE CONF
Basically there are only 26 Latin letters capitalised.
Still some Greeks still a bit of Arabic.
NOTE CONF
You still don't have enough letters.
Um, so they are different from the A and B?
NOTE CONF
We just had any other questions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's a good yeah a good point that the
dot product with the points A and B aren't um
NOTE CONF
zero.
But we do have if you rearrange this we do
NOTE CONF
have x dot Start n equals p dot n.
So that must be true.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that um, is planes.
NOTE CONF
Um, let us move on to talking about projections.
Which is another thing that's very important.
NOTE CONF
So let's start with just a projection on a line.
So there's my line L.
NOTE CONF
It's a vector equation of a line.
So I'm going to have some D that goes along
NOTE CONF
the line.
And let's have some p that's on my line.
NOTE CONF
And that's going to define parametrically the equation of my
line.
NOTE CONF
Okay I'm then going to have some vector u.
And at some point you I'm going to put the
NOTE CONF
tail of u on the line L because I can
do that.
NOTE CONF
U is some vector that I'm going to put the
tail on the line u.
NOTE CONF
Why not?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm going to project you down to L.
You've done this a lot.
NOTE CONF
You've been projecting secretly ever since you started doing coordinate
geometry.
NOTE CONF
So, um, when you, when you do things like, you
know, we consider x, y as, uh, x times one
NOTE CONF
vector and y times those vectors, that is just projection.
We're taking a vector and we're projecting down to the
NOTE CONF
x coordinate and we're projecting down to the y coordinate.
So we're doing exactly the same thing you've been doing
NOTE CONF
ever since you started writing coordinates down.
We're just doing it for General Line.
NOTE CONF
Um, so again we want to project down.
We want to find this Vector, which I'm going to
NOTE CONF
call u1.
So U1 is lying on my line.
NOTE CONF
It's along the direction of my line and it forms
a little right angled triangle with you.
NOTE CONF
What's this dotted vector?
What's thinking about what we did yesterday?
NOTE CONF
How can I write this line in terms of U1
and U.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Pardon?
NOTE CONF
Uh, I'm just thinking.
I don't think you're wrong, but I'm just thinking in
NOTE CONF
terms of addition and subtraction.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It's u minus u1.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's what that vector is.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And some people make all this U2 because it's the
NOTE CONF
second coordinate of U with respect to the normal of
this line.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we then want to project down.
What do we how does U1 relate to the vectors?
NOTE CONF
Um, on about the line L, what do what do
we know about U1 and the vectors DNP?
NOTE CONF
Yeah they're parallel and yeah.
Good.
NOTE CONF
They're multiple.
Good.
NOTE CONF
So this is some multiple of D uh because D
is the direction of my line.
NOTE CONF
This is pointing in the same direction.
So it's some scalar multiple.
NOTE CONF
It's a different size but it's got the same direction
okay.
NOTE CONF
So we know we hit this vector.
And this vector have to be perpendicular.
NOTE CONF
And we know this one is just a um scalar
multiple of this.
NOTE CONF
So what's nice operation.
We know if we've got perpendicular lines dot product.
NOTE CONF
Brilliant.
So um we can put this all together.
NOTE CONF
We know that U1 well actually we know You two
dotted with D has to be zero.
NOTE CONF
We know this is perpendicular to the line.
We can write this as u minus t times d.
NOTE CONF
Instead of writing u1, let's write in terms of d.
Equals zero.
NOTE CONF
And then if you do a load of rearranging the
book does this.
NOTE CONF
So I'm not going to go too much detail.
But if you rearrange this you can find that t
NOTE CONF
is a number that's equal to u d divided by
the size of d.
NOTE CONF
And that is how we define the projection.
So we're going to say the projection of u onto
NOTE CONF
the line L which is defined by we're going to.
Well yeah we can define it by L.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes people might write here D because D's defining the
direction of this line.
NOTE CONF
And actually if you think about this projection the position
of this line doesn't matter.
NOTE CONF
It's Parallel lines, so we more care about the direction.
Then we do the exact point it goes through.
NOTE CONF
Um, so some people might write this as the projection
onto the vector d of u.
NOTE CONF
But all of this is going to be is it's
going to be ug over d squared times d.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that is how we project.
NOTE CONF
And we can do this iteratively.
That's how to project onto one line.
NOTE CONF
If I then had another line I could take you
to and I could project onto another line.
NOTE CONF
So I could find the X coordinate project onto the
x axis, for example.
NOTE CONF
And then my U2 is going to be something lying
in the y and z coordinate, the y z plane,
NOTE CONF
and then I could project that vector into the y
coordinate.
NOTE CONF
And what I'm going to get left with is the
z coordinate.
NOTE CONF
So I can do this iteratively.
I can build it up, um, all the way onto
NOTE CONF
projecting onto a plane for example.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So actually let's do an example together of projecting, um,
onto a plane.
NOTE CONF
I think.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Let's do this.
Um, so we have let's think about our plane.
NOTE CONF
We're going to give it a normal vector n, and
we're going to have two vectors u and v lying
NOTE CONF
in my plane.
All happy so far.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Uh, we're then going to have some vector u.
NOTE CONF
And we're going to try and define it.
And I'm going to do this example with actual numbers.
NOTE CONF
So uh there we go.
So we're going to have the vector U which is
NOTE CONF
going to be 213.
And we're going to have the vector.
NOTE CONF
We're going to have our plane defined by uh this
equation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's the equation.
NOTE CONF
My plane it's not got a constant term.
So where actually what point has to lie on this
NOTE CONF
plane.
The origin.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Because you can take turns to be zero.
NOTE CONF
Good.
So we know that the origin is somewhere on this
NOTE CONF
plane.
There you go.
NOTE CONF
That's the origin.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's project you down.
I'm going to call this plane Pi because that's you
NOTE CONF
normally call a plane capital P or capital Pi.
Um, so we'll go for pi.
NOTE CONF
There's some P's later.
Uh, we have two options.
NOTE CONF
We could project onto the normal and take that away
to find you one.
NOTE CONF
That's the other thing we could do.
So in our line example, we could project onto the
NOTE CONF
normal line to find U2.
And then via subtraction we'd get U1.
NOTE CONF
And with a plane that can sometimes be more helpful
because there's only one normal, whereas there are two vectors
NOTE CONF
in my play.
So you're kind of huffing the work in some ways.
NOTE CONF
But this is where how you write the plane becomes
important, because if you don't have the normal, then that's
NOTE CONF
work to do beforehand.
So we're not going to just project onto the normal
NOTE CONF
and take away.
We're going to just project onto these two vectors, um,
NOTE CONF
straight away.
So we are going to have the projection onto my
NOTE CONF
plane pie.
We will go to any questions okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, of the vector you and we're going to do
this, but um.
NOTE CONF
Let's call these two what should I call these two
vectors?
NOTE CONF
Anyone have any preference?
Do you one and d two.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I realise I've got you twice.
I'm going to make this 1AW.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to first project onto D1 and then
project onto D2.
NOTE CONF
So we need you dot D1 over the size of
d1 squared times D1.
NOTE CONF
And then we're going to do the same thing with
two.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense to anyone.
Does anyone have any thoughts questions.
NOTE CONF
Have I lost you all or is it just a
Friday?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
We are the vectors of the plane.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
And then you as a random vector that's not in
NOTE CONF
the plane.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So what we're trying to do is we're trying to
project this down and find this vector, which is the
NOTE CONF
projection of U onto our plane.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
But what we're doing.
NOTE CONF
Is it goes through zero.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
In this case it has to because there's no kind
of additional point.
NOTE CONF
If I I'd set T and S to be zero,
then I'm going to get out of here.
NOTE CONF
X equals the origin, so I know the origin is
somewhere on my plane.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any other questions yet?
NOTE CONF
Just to be precise, shouldn't all be in the beginning
of you.
NOTE CONF
Pardon?
Cos you start from the origin.
NOTE CONF
So from the future should it be.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Well, yes.
Again this is the kind of what is a vector
NOTE CONF
question here.
Are we saying you as a point that starts from
NOTE CONF
the origin or we just turning up saying u is
the vector 213.
NOTE CONF
If we're just saying u is the vector that goes
along to across one and up three, then we don't
NOTE CONF
have to start from the origin.
If we're saying u is the vector corresponding to a
NOTE CONF
point, then yes, they would have to be from the
origin.
NOTE CONF
But at this point we're not we're not saying.
It's.
NOTE CONF
I'm treating it very much as just a line at
this point as opposed to you.
NOTE CONF
The point I appreciate this is very confusing.
We use the word vector to mean a position vector.
NOTE CONF
We use it to mean a line.
We use it to mean something geometric.
NOTE CONF
Um.
You kind of get used to seeing these things in
NOTE CONF
context, which isn't the overly helpful answer I appreciate.
Um, but there we go.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so what is u dotted with D1?
What are we going to have?
NOTE CONF
Here's my vector u, here's D1.
What happens if I dot them?
NOTE CONF
I get four plus minus one plus minus six.
Good.
NOTE CONF
And what am I going to have on the bottom.
What is D1 dotted with itself.
NOTE CONF
Three.
Yeah it's four plus one.
NOTE CONF
Oh no it's not three.
It's four plus one plus four.
NOTE CONF
So it's nine.
We're looking at the norm squared here.
NOTE CONF
So four plus one plus four.
Everyone happy.
NOTE CONF
They're good.
And then we're going to times this by the vector
NOTE CONF
D1.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What about you dot d1.
What are we going to have here.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Two plus one plus three.
Let's write this all down.
NOTE CONF
I should probably write this in order.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
And what is D2 dotted with D2?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Good.
NOTE CONF
So we can do all this addition.
And we're going to have minus three over nine times
NOTE CONF
our vector.
Uh, but in fact, let's just make that a third.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
Plus six over three which is I'm actually going to
NOTE CONF
keep it over three just because it's common denominator.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if we all add that up, what are we
going to get?
NOTE CONF
Something with a factor of three in the front.
Uh what.
NOTE CONF
Six minus two is four.
What's the next one going to be?
NOTE CONF
Seven.
Don't ever do maths live on a stage.
NOTE CONF
Uh, six minus minus two.
Eight.
NOTE CONF
The square of the, uh, Divisor advisor.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Ah.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
You.
Right.
NOTE CONF
That should be.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Okay, good.
NOTE CONF
So that is the.
I've got a different.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, are we all happy there, or have I made
a mistake?
NOTE CONF
I'm fully willing to believe I've made a mistake in
the calculation.
NOTE CONF
Or are we generally happy with what's gone on there?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Why did you add the two projections?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we're projecting onto this.
We're projecting onto the line you, uh, so we've got
NOTE CONF
one line here which we're projecting onto and one line
here, or, you know, one line here.
NOTE CONF
Projecting onto.
All we want to do, though, is project onto the
NOTE CONF
plane.
So actually we're not trying to project just onto you
NOTE CONF
just onto D1 or just onto D2.
We just we need those two projections together to get
NOTE CONF
a point in the plane.
So is that a point that we've got.
NOTE CONF
Is that.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So this is this is a point um, and this
is going to be well, it's a it's the vector
NOTE CONF
from our starting position wherever our tail of you met
the point, the plane.
NOTE CONF
Um, it is that vector there that is going to
be perpendicular, um, to the normal from you.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
If you look at it, if you're staring above, looking
NOTE CONF
down, that's the vector.
It's the shadow of the vector.
NOTE CONF
You.
If you're hovering.
NOTE CONF
Above.
Directly above the plane.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Any other questions?
NOTE CONF
No no, no.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so projection is helpful because this perpendicular distance is
the shortest distance from this point to this point.
NOTE CONF
So one of the big applications we use of projections
is finding the shortest distance.
NOTE CONF
Um but let us move on because we still have
to do the cross-product.
NOTE CONF
Um, so let us discuss the cross-product.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Last topic.
Um, so everything I've said so far today and yesterday
NOTE CONF
works for any vector or you can generalise it to
any size vector.
NOTE CONF
Um, you need to be slightly careful about some details,
but generally the basic theory works for how big your
NOTE CONF
vector is.
The cross-product only works in our three.
NOTE CONF
This is only in R3, so that's something to be
very careful.
NOTE CONF
There's also a version in seven dimensions actually.
But let's not mention that.
NOTE CONF
Um, but otherwise there is absolutely no generalisation.
It holds in three and seven and nowhere else.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so all three vectors, um, that is the definition
of the cross-product you cannot see.
NOTE CONF
Ta da!
There we go.
NOTE CONF
That is how you calculate the cross product.
Um, please make sure you can calculate the cross product.
NOTE CONF
It is one of those types of.
So we've now got two types of vector multiplication.
NOTE CONF
The cross product is important and it is surprisingly important.
It turns up in surprisingly wide areas of maths.
NOTE CONF
So it's useful to have some practice to just doing
some cross products and making sure you can do it
NOTE CONF
reasonably confidently.
Um, uh, so yeah, always a good thing to be
NOTE CONF
able to do.
However, that is the definition that is really not very
NOTE CONF
helpful at telling you anything about anything about what is
going on.
NOTE CONF
So let us think about what's going on a bit
more geometrically.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the cross product, if I've got two vectors
u and v.
NOTE CONF
The cross product finds me the vector perpendicular to both
of them, Hence why works in three dimensions.
NOTE CONF
So u and v are going to span some kind
of plane.
NOTE CONF
The cross product is going to find me some multiple
of the normal.
NOTE CONF
It all actually follows a right hand rule, so you
can work out which way the cross product should point.
NOTE CONF
You stick your forefinger in your middle finger as u
and v, and your thumb points in the direction of
NOTE CONF
the cross product.
Okay, so that's telling us the direction.
NOTE CONF
What else do we need for vector though?
Magnitude.
NOTE CONF
Good.
So the magnitude is actually the.
NOTE CONF
Size.
Of the parallelogram spanned by u and v.
NOTE CONF
So if you got u as one edge and v
is the other edge, that parallelogram in the middle, the
NOTE CONF
area of this equals the size of the cross product.
So let us think about what this looks like.
NOTE CONF
What's a big screen?
This big screen.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so here's my two vectors u and v.
And if I as I change v then that's not
NOTE CONF
what I meant to do.
Um, as I change v and make it closer to
NOTE CONF
you, that area of my parallelogram gets smaller and so
too does my cross-product.
NOTE CONF
Whereas if I make my parallelogram really big, my my
cross product gets really big.
NOTE CONF
And actually I can then use my right hand rule.
I can flip it if I keep going around.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this works not just in the x coordinate.
NOTE CONF
If I move this up, I tilt it and I'm
going to tilt my perpendicular line.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
And then I can shift things around again.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we've.
NOTE CONF
does that make sense?
Does anyone have any questions on on that aspect of
NOTE CONF
the cross product.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So then let's think about a kind of more natural
definition of the cross product.
NOTE CONF
Um, how could we find the area of this parallelogram
just going back to kind of school maths.
NOTE CONF
How do we work out the area of a parallelogram?
A5 yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
Half based, um, based on site.
NOTE CONF
Or actually, let's try thinking about it as two triangles.
How do you work out the area of a general
NOTE CONF
triangle?
What if I call this angle theta?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Good.
NOTE CONF
But I've got two of these so we'll get rid
of the half.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So this area I could just say is well it's
NOTE CONF
the size of one length.
That's the norm of u times the norm of V.
NOTE CONF
And then the triangle is half that times sine.
So but we've got double that.
NOTE CONF
So are we.
Are you the time to sign.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And then some people therefore define the cross product as
NOTE CONF
this thing.
Uh, times the unit vector n where n is the
NOTE CONF
unit normal.
Two u and v.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that is a useful thing to see.
NOTE CONF
Um okay.
So we now have.
NOTE CONF
So what happens when u and v are perpendicular.
Does anything fun happen there.
NOTE CONF
Yeah this equals one.
So so r when when we're perpendicular we get the
NOTE CONF
biggest possible value size of u times v.
So if I can kind of.
NOTE CONF
Uh, let's make these a bit smaller so we can
see, uh, if I oh, let's let's reset it.
NOTE CONF
And then it'd be easy to see in the flat.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So commonly that is perpendicular.
This is as big as it gets.
NOTE CONF
If I move it this way it gets used you
times V is getting smaller.
NOTE CONF
That's the biggest thing it can be if I move
it that way.
NOTE CONF
It's also getting smaller.
So it's maximal when they're at a right angle.
NOTE CONF
What about when they're not at a right angle.
What about when they're parallel zero.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Good.
NOTE CONF
So let's think about well the area of my parallelogram.
Is.
NOTE CONF
Doesn't exist.
So yes indeed it is.
NOTE CONF
Zero.
Um, so this actually gives us quite a useful way
NOTE CONF
of checking when things are parallel perpendicular.
We have um the dot product is zero if they're
NOTE CONF
perpendicular and the cross product of zero if they are
parallel.
NOTE CONF
So that is a useful thing to be able to
check.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let us do one last question then on um.
NOTE CONF
On the planes and perpendicular lines.
So is it true which the following is true.
NOTE CONF
You've got a plane defined in normal form, um, with
n equals x minus p.
NOTE CONF
And we've got another plane defined uh, in parametric form.
How do these two link together.
NOTE CONF
So we've got a plane in normal form and the
same plane in parametric form.
NOTE CONF
So A and B are two vectors in the plane
n is a vector perpendicular to the plane, p is
NOTE CONF
a position vector for a point that lies on the
plane, but the vector p itself does not lie in
NOTE CONF
the plane, which is.
The following is true.
NOTE CONF
Does a times b equal n?
I'm going to give you a couple of minutes.
NOTE CONF
Feel free to have a chat.
I'm going to give you one minute because we're nearly
NOTE CONF
at the end.
So quick vote.
NOTE CONF
Go with your gut.
Feel free to guess.
NOTE CONF
Okay I'm going to give you 30 more seconds.
I know I'm having you, but honestly, feel free to
NOTE CONF
guess.
Can I give you ten more seconds?
NOTE CONF
But we have a clear winner.
So this is good.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So voting is in and we have a times B
NOTE CONF
equals n okay.
That's what the vast majority of you are saying.
NOTE CONF
Some of you are saying it depends on the vectors.
So, um, are you good?
NOTE CONF
I like the person I've convinced Vector Fridays are fun
fighters.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Um, N is perpendicular to A and B.
NOTE CONF
That is very true.
Yes, n is perpendicular to a and b, uh, a
NOTE CONF
and b lie in the plane n is perpendicular to
the plane.
NOTE CONF
So those are perpendicular.
That is very true.
NOTE CONF
Um, the normal is perpendicular to both direction vectors.
The normal is.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
That is all very true reasoning.
NOTE CONF
I very much agree with all of you.
Um, sadly, you are all wrong.
NOTE CONF
The vast majority of you are wrong.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Let's think about this.
So you are true.
NOTE CONF
They are all perpendicular.
The direction is right.
NOTE CONF
So A times B does lie in the direction of
n, but ns any normal vector n is any vector
NOTE CONF
that is perpendicular to the plane.
So it could be a different size.
NOTE CONF
So what is true is they are parallel that a
times b a cross b is some multiple of the
NOTE CONF
normal vector I have randomly given you in this equation,
but that doesn't mean they are the same.
NOTE CONF
They could be a different size, same direction diff wrong
size.
NOTE CONF
We all seem very convinced that a cross N cross
A doesn't necessarily equal B, and vice versa.
NOTE CONF
Um, there is a case where that is true.
What extra condition would we need on A and B
NOTE CONF
where that is true?
For A and.
NOTE CONF
B, yeah.
If A and B were perpendicular to each other and
NOTE CONF
all the sizes worked out, then that could be true.
Um, so if you had, for example, three vectors that
NOTE CONF
were all unit vectors and all perpendicular to each other,
then that is true.
NOTE CONF
So it is true for the vector I, j and
k for example.
NOTE CONF
So you might have seen I j equals k and
all the other ways around that works.
NOTE CONF
Um, so yes.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We are out of time.
NOTE CONF
Um, homework was released.
I mentioned that Andreas will be with you next week.
NOTE CONF
Have a nice weekend.
Thank you for coming.
NOTE CONF